If you want to simulate something in the physical world nowadays
use a computer.
But what if that was not possible?
What if you lived in the 50s
and you had to determine whether a bold but uncertain plan
to contain the Bay of San Fransisco was a good idea?
The answer is this: the bay model of the US Army Corps of Engineers.
The bay model is larger than half a hectare.
What you are looking at now is one of our earlier scientific, hydrodynamic
technical test facilities.
And this was the instrument they used to watch
what the unforeseen consequences of the John Reberplan would be.
In the 40s and 50s a man named John Reber
a plan to completely change the Bay of San Fransisco.
Huge dams would make freshwater lakes.
There would be new land reclamation for industry and for air or naval ports.
Reber said it would make the bay a defendable military fortification,
bring people safely to land,
and the now dammed rivers would provide enormous amounts of drinking water.
Reber was not a professional engineer.
He was a theater producer who did a lot of research,
but because he worked in the showbiz, he knew how to sell something.
And according to most, he was a kind, sincere, convincing man.
So contrary to other ideas for gigantic construction projects, the Reber plan actually hit.
Discussions went back and forth for years, but ultimately
seemed Reber's plan realistic enough, at least for politicians,
that the US Army Corps of Engineers was commissioned to see if it was practical.
And they got $ 2.5 million, that's about 25 million today, to figure it out.
And with that they built this.
This model was, when it was built, the next step, the new generation.
It was extremely accurate as an instrument.
At that time there was not really anything better.
There are 250 000 strategically placed small copper cubes in the bottom of the model
to prevent the salt water and fresh water from flowing in and out too quickly,
but also to model small protrusions that may be in the bottom of the bay.
The model has a scale of 1: 1000 horizontal,
1: 100 scale vertical and 1: 100 scale in time.
That means about 200 times a day
the flood becomes and then again ebb,
Because the Bay of San Fransisco has tides, and therefore the model too.
Everything was hand-operated for the first 30 years.
It took about 12 to 15 people to operate it,
but sometimes there were 60 people at the same time
who worked on all different experiments
and everyone had to work completely synchronously.
It was like an orchestra.
And the trainees were there on chairs, in lab coats, in the water,
to measure different currents of the tide.
It took 3 years to test Rebers plan
and in that time Reber died.
And for his supporters the results of the model were terrible.
It looked good on paper, and convinced many people,
but when they tested it, they saw that it was only good on paper.
The end result is that it failed in as many as 99 different ways.
Wild and unpredictable catastrophic floods are just one of them.
The dams would not make lakes, but evaporation tanks.
The tide would make dangerous currents and waves.
In short, the Reberplan would not only become a disaster,
it would be a billion dollar disaster.
The ecosystem would also be destroyed,
but it was the 50s, so nobody really thought about that.
the Corps of Engineers after they had done their work,
thought that the model could ever be useful again.
And that's what it was,
to test smaller and more practical plans across the bay for the coming decades.
These days computers can do this of course
for a fraction of the time and money,
but it is still a good educational tool.
The last time that is talked about a grand civil construction plan like this,
about Hermal Sörgels Atlantropa,
I said it was an example of how big we can dream,
but this model is an example of something else.
From science.
Have a hypothesis.
From those tests.
And then, if it fails, admit that it is wrong.
There should be no shame in it.
Sometimes we pursue bad ideas,
and we change our mind on the basis of new evidence
and allow others to do the same
and that's something our world should build on,
and that is exactly what this model did.